the richest in our society are making
billions off of kobe 19.
that is going to keep our economy in a
crisis for decades i know
because i made millions as a trader in
the city between the same thing would
happen after the 2008 crash
so my name is gary stevenson in 2011 i
was citibank's most profitable trader
globally and i made that money by
betting that
after 2008 crisis there would be no
powerful economic recovery
because economists don't understand the
importance of inequality
all right so there's been a lot of talk
in the news about how poor people have
been most affected by coronavirus
but what i think has not been understood
is how much money richer people have
made
now this can be easily understood if you
understand the flows of money in society
so normally richer people spend a lot of
money
now that's important because it drives
wages and it drives jobs for ordinary
workers
they need that money because ordinary
workers have to pay rent bills
mortgages and that money flows back up
to the owners of properties and
owners of movies who are the rich so in
normal times money flows in a circle
rich people spend a lot ordinary people
have to pay their rent their mortgages
their bills
now when covered happened suddenly rich
people massively cut their spending
quite simply because a lot of things
they like to spend
on holidays hospitality they couldn't
spend anymore
now that causes a big problem in this
circle suddenly money is not flowing
around
it's just flowing in one way and if that
keeps happening
very quickly ordinary people run out of
money and they can't pay their bills and
they can't pay their rent they can't pay
their mortgages
so obviously government had to do
something they came in with furlough
schemes and other support schemes to
support people who had lost their
jobs the problem is they didn't take
money from the same place it was coming
before rather than taxing the rich
to help struggling workers they simply
printed the money at the bank of england
what that means is money's still not
flying around in a circle now it's
stolen in a line
the bank of england prints new money
they lend it to the government building
up the government debt
they give it to ordinary workers
ordinary workers give it to richer
people when they pay their bills
and richer people are just keeping the
money it's going
from the bank of england and the
government to the very rich
the amount of money that has been
printed is enormous it's 450 billion
pounds which is more than six thousand
pound for every man woman and child in
the country
there's been talk about more austerity
more taxes on ordinary people
now if that happens that can increase
inequality even further but what i want
to talk about is that massive
increase of money that has been built up
in a bank account of richer people
what is going to happen with that money
now listen i've been poor and i've been
rich
i know how ordinary people spend their
money and i know how rich people spend
their money
now richer people if you give them a
massive amount of money they're going to
use that to buy stocks they're going to
use that to buy property
and that's going to push up the price of
those things that means that right now
just as millions of ordinary people are
losing their jobs richer people are
going to get a massive income from
increase in the prices of the properties
and the stocks that they own it's
important to understand how this is
going to affect ordinary families
you know back in 2008 we made the same
mistake we tried to fix an economic
crisis by pouring money into the economy
and it all ended up with richer people
what happened after that stock prices
trebled quadrupled
house prices in london doubled what's it
gonna mean for ordinary families if
house prices double again
it's gonna mean that for millions of
families in this country they will never
ever be able to own property no matter
how hard they work no matter what job
they get
it is going to end social mobility in
this country it is going to end the
ability of ordinary families
to access housing i was working in
canary wharf in 2008.
i saw the economists and the traders
predict who would get a massive rapid
recovery because of all the money
getting poured in
but it didn't happen that recovery was
only for the owners of stocks the owners
of property
for ordinary people there was no
recovery because the inequality was
never dealt with
if we do the same thing now again we
will have 20 30 years of economic
weakness for ordinary people
this problem is not going to fix itself
inequality will only get worse and worse
it will grow like a cancer in our
economy listen
i don't want to live in a country where
ordinary people
can't have access to good quality
housing to financial security
i don't want to live in a country where
if you're born poor you will live your
whole life poor and you will die poor
and there's nothing you can do about it
we've got a tax system in this country
which is very good at taxing ordinary
workers
if you work you're going to pay your
income tax but the richest people in
this country
often get their income through different
forms trusts inheritances capital gains
these are all taxed in different methods
and are very easy to legally avoid
under that current tax system it is
inevitable that the very richest will
get richer and richer
house prices will get less and less
affordable ordinary people get squeezed
and the economy will never recover
i don't want to stand in front of you
and make pessimistic predictions but
i've been betting on this for 10 years
and i've been right for 10 years
if we don't fix inequality we're not
going to have an economic recovery
we need to reform the tax system so that
it doesn't just tax the income of
working people
but also taxes the wealth of the super
rich
i grew up here in east london i came
from a poor family and i went to work
down there in canary wharf
i know how difficult it is for kids from
ordinary families to make something of
themselves
to get property to get financial
security and i know how important it is
to people from families like that and
that's going to get more difficult now
if we don't deal with the extra
inequality we're getting from cover 19.
but it's also an opportunity the
inequality is becoming more obvious to
everyone
that unfairness this is a chance for us
to come together and challenge the
system
and make sure that the very richest in
society actually contribute
instead of getting richer every time
it's a crisis
we need to reform the tax system we need
to make things fairer
if we don't do that the future is going
to be bleak